Blog for query insights dashboards and api updates (#3725)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-03-31-query-insights-updates.md

---

layout: post
title: "What's new in OpenSearch Query Insights: Advanced grouping, dashboards, and historical analysis"
authors:
   - chenyang
   - kolchfa

> date: 2025-03-31

Reviewer: Update the publish date to tomorrow: 2025-04-22

categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: OpenSearch query insights, query grouping, query similarity, query dashboards, search performance, query optimization, query latency, search analytics, resource monitoring, OpenSearch Dashboards

> meta_description: Explore recent advancements in OpenSearch Query Insights, featuring query grouping by similarity, a dedicated OpenSearch Dashboards plugin for visualization and configuration, a local index exporter for historical analysis, and new plugin health monitoring capabilities.

Reviewer: Please update the meta with the following: 

_meta_keywords:_ Query insights, query performance, OpenSearch Dashboards, query grouping by similarity, advanced query grouping, query monitoring, search optimization, monitor plugin health, local index exporter

_meta_description:_ Learn how the latest enhancements to OpenSearch Query Insights, including advanced query grouping, dedicated dashboards, historical analysis capabilities, and improved plugin health monitoring, improve performance.

Author: Done.

---

OpenSearch Query Insights gives you essential visibility into how search queries perform, helping you understand how queries run and how they use cluster resources. Since introducing [Query Insights](https://opensearch.org/blog/query-insights/), we've aimed to provide tools that help you identify performance bottlenecks and optimize your queries---ultimately improving the search experience for your users. Analyzing queries effectively is key to maintaining fast, efficient search operations.

Based on that foundation and shaped by your feedback, we've continued to develop Query Insights. This post introduces several new features that bring deeper analytical capabilities through advanced query grouping, improved usability with a dedicated dashboard, historical analysis using export options, and better operational monitoring of the Query Insights system itself.

> ## Grouping similar queries to improve analysis

Reviewer 2: "Grouping" => "Group" (to match the format of the following headings)?

> ## Grouping similar queries to improve analysis

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Group similar queries to improve analysis
```

// Query 1
{ "query": { "term": { "user_id": "valueA" } } }

// Query 2
{ "query": { "term": { "user_id": "valueB" } } }
```

With similarity grouping enabled, both queries are placed in the same group, defined by the structure `query → term → user_id`. Query Insights then shows aggregate metrics for the group, such as average latency, total execution count, and combined resource usage, along with a representative query example.

**How to enable it:** You can turn on similarity grouping by updating your cluster settings. The default value (`none`) disables grouping:

```json
PUT _cluster/settings
{
  "persistent" : {
    "search.insights.top_queries.group_by" : "similarity"
  }
}
```

You can also fine-tune grouping behavior by configuring whether field names or types influence the similarity structure. For more information, see [Grouping top N queries](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/observing-your-data/query-insights/grouping-top-n-queries/).

**Why it matters:** This feature shifts the focus from individual queries to shared query patterns. It helps you find and improve high-impact query structures more effectively, making root cause analysis and performance tuning easier.

> ## Explore query insights using a visual dashboard

Reviewer 3: No, it refers to the general concept

The Query Insights API gives you direct access to performance data, but a visual interface can make it easier to spot patterns and fine-tune settings. That’s why we’ve added **Query Insights to OpenSearch Dashboards**---a dedicated experience built into the Dashboards interface.

> 

Reviewer 3: I don't think so

> 

Reviewer 2: If we're intending to emphasize the bold text, including "we've added" would make more sense in context (as opposed to the currently bold phrase---why are we emphasizing it? Because we've added it).

> 

Reviewer 2: @kolchfa-aws

> 

Reviewer 3: Sure. It just looks a bit weird to me because the em dash makes it as if it's a description of "we've added". But maybe it's just me :)

> 

Reviewer 2: I think the em dash works as a description of the entire bold phrase, but we could also use a comma instead of an em dash if it looks less weird 😄

> 

Reviewer 3: That's much better!

> The Query Insights API gives you direct access to performance data, but a visual interface can make it easier to spot patterns and fine-tune settings. That's why **we've added Query Insights to OpenSearch Dashboards**---a dedicated experience built into the Dashboards interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Query Insights API gives you direct access to performance data, but a visual interface can make it easier to spot patterns and fine-tune settings. That's why **we've added Query Insights to OpenSearch Dashboards**, a dedicated experience built into the Dashboards interface.
```

> This view includes several key features:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This interface includes several key features:
```

## Analyze historical trends using the local index exporter

Real-time monitoring helps you address performance issues as they happen. However, to understand long-term trends or investigate past incidents, you need access to historical data. The **local index exporter** helps you achieve this.

When configured to persist historical data, Query Insights stores Top N query records---either individual queries or grouped ones---in dedicated OpenSearch indexes within your cluster.

**How it works:** Set the exporter type to `local_index` in your cluster settings. OpenSearch then creates a new index each day using a standardized naming format, such as `top_queries-YYYY.MM.dd-hashcode`. You can control data retention using the `delete_after_days` setting, which removes older indexes after a defined number of days (default is `7`). For example, to configure the local index exporter to store latency data, use the following request. Optionally, you can set the retention period to a custom value (in this example, 30 days):

```json
PUT _cluster/settings
{
  "persistent" : {
    "search.insights.top_queries.exporter.type" : "local_index",

>         "search.insights.top_queries.exporter.delete_after_days" : 30

Author: there are some indentation issues with this block

Reviewer 3: Resolved

1. **Health Stats API:** Use the `GET /_insights/health_stats` endpoint to retrieve operational metrics from each node running the plugin. This includes:
   - Status and settings for the internal thread pool (`query_insights_executor`)
   - Current size of the queue that buffers incoming query records (`QueryRecordsQueueSize`)
   - Cache performance stats, such as `FieldTypeCacheStats` used during query grouping
   - Resource usage for Top N query collectors

2. **OpenTelemetry error metrics:** If OpenTelemetry is enabled in your cluster, Query Insights reports plugin-specific error counters. These metrics track operational failures within the plugin, such as
   - `LOCAL_INDEX_READER_PARSING_EXCEPTIONS`
   - `DATA_INGEST_EXCEPTIONS`
   - `LOCAL_INDEX_EXPORTER_BULK_FAILURES`
   - `QUERY_CATEGORIZE_EXCEPTIONS`

**Why it matters:** These monitoring tools provide visibility into the plugin's behavior and resource impact. They're especially useful if you notice missing insights data, delays in reporting, or suspect that Query Insights might be affecting overall cluster performance.

> 

Reviewer 2: "resource impact" => "effect on resources" or "influence on resources"?

> To explore all available metrics and fields, see  [Query Insights plugin health](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/observing-your-data/query-insights/health/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To explore all available metrics and fields, see [Query Insights plugin health](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/observing-your-data/query-insights/health/).
```

## Conclusion: A more cohesive query analysis workflow

> Query Insights continues to evolve, driven by one clear goal: providing actionable visibility into search query performance. The latest enhancements---**query grouping by similarity**, the **Query Insights in OpenSearch Dashboards**, the **local index exporter**, and **plugin health monitoring**---represent major steps toward that goal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Query Insights continues to evolve, driven by one clear goal: providing actionable visibility into search query performance. The latest enhancements---**query grouping by similarity**, **Query Insights in OpenSearch Dashboards**, the **local index exporter**, and **plugin health monitoring**---represent major steps toward that goal.
```

> These features are designed to function cohesively, creating a more integrated and effective workflow. The dashboard provides a central place to visualize top N queries or query groups and to configure monitoring settings with just a few clicks. The local index exporter enables historical analysis, letting you explore trends or investigate past issues through persisted data. Throughout this process, the health monitoring tools provide confidence that the insights system itself is operating reliably.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These features are designed to function cohesively, creating a more integrated and effective workflow. The dashboard provides a central location where you can visualize top N queries or query groups and configure monitoring settings in just a few clicks. The local index exporter enables historical analysis, letting you explore trends or investigate past issues through persisted data. Throughout this process, the health monitoring tools provide confidence that the Query Insights system is operating effectively.
```
